Updated Readme: Work Done and Reproduction Instructions (#9)
ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets: README.md

# Spinal-Rootlets Segmentation on T2w Images

## 1) Project Overview

> The goal of this project is to develop a deep learning (DL) technique-based method to segment and locate the spinal
> roots.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of this project is to develop a deep learning (DL)-based method to segment and locate the spinal rootlets.
```

## 2) Work Done

### A) Literature and Data Review

No articles were found on this topic.

After reviewing the available
datasets ([issue#1](https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/issues/1#issue-1706345176)), it was determined
that none of them were suitable.

### B) Dataset Creation

Initially, the plan was to test with a binary label (0: no rootlet, 1: rootlet). In the following text, the datasets
will be numbered as D1, D2, etc., and the models as M1, M2, etc.

> The original dataset (D0a) can be found [here](https://openneuro.org/datasets/ds004507/versions/1.0.1). An initial labeling of

Reviewer: Shouldn't be `D1a`?

```suggestion
The original dataset (D1a) can be found [here](https://openneuro.org/datasets/ds004507/versions/1.0.1). An initial labeling of
```

Author: I planned to name the raw dataset D0 so D0a for the open neuro one and D0b for the spine-generic. 
In the original openneuro dataset there are 10 subjects with 3 sessions but I never use more than 10 subjects and 2 sessions per subject.

12 subjects (D1a) was performed to train one fold of the nnUNetV2 3d_fullres model (refer
to [issue#5](https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/issues/5)). The resulting model (M1a) achieved a Dice
score of approximately 0.52.

After conducting inference on the entire dataset and performing manual corrections, the dataset was expanded to include
20 subjects. However, two subjects were subsequently excluded due to unsatisfactory label quality (
see [issue#7](https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/issues/7)), resulting in an 18-subject dataset (D1b). A
full training on 5 folds with 250 epochs resulted in a Dice score of approximately 0.58 (M1b).

Inference was further conducted on T2w data from 267 subjects from
the [spinegeneric](https://github.com/spine-generic/data-multi-subject#spine-generic-public-database-multi-subject)

> dataset (D0b) (release r20230223), which had an isotropic voxel size of 0.8mm. Some of the predictions from this inference were

Reviewer: I would include a link pointing directly to the `r20230223` release:
https://github.com/spine-generic/data-multi-subject/tree/r20230223

manually corrected, and the resulting dataset was merged with the previous dataset (D1b), resulting in a final dataset

> containing 38 subjects (D2). A full training on 5 folds with 1000 epochs resulted in a Dice score of approximately

Reviewer: Why the final dataset (D2) has only 38 subjects when spine-generic (D0b) has 267 subjects?

Author: It was really hard for some centers to see the spinal rootlet. So I chose to don't take subjects were manual correction was too tricky.

0.77 (M2) [issue#8](https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/issues/8).

> The previous dataset (D2) has been modified by changing voxel values according to the spinal level (D3). An initial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final dataset (D2) has been modified by changing voxel values according to the spinal level resulting in dataset D3. An initial
```

training of 5 folds with 1000 epochs has been done. After reviewing the results and manually correcting the dataset (

> sct_maths -d 1 used to help labeling this time), a new training of 5 folds with 2000 epochs is in progress.

Reviewer: It is not clear to me what was the purpose of `sct_maths -d 1`

Author: yes I will clarify, it is for denoising

### C) Reproduce
- Find labeled images 
- Create different dataset 
- Run training 
- Run inference 

> In the next section all the instruction to reproduce the label file used in the final dataset will be described. Hoever label file are also available here (give to dataset with root_label)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next section, all the instructions to reproduce the label files used in the final dataset will be described. However, label files are also available here (give to dataset with root_label).
```

"(give to dataset with root_label)" this last part is not clear to me

Author: I was a note to add the link to download the nnUNet dataset

#introduce script to convert BIDS->nnUNet and nnUNet->BIDS
#explain how to label on FSLeyes 

#### i) Reproduce D1a, M1a and D1b, M1b
Clone the original dataset D0a
```
git clone https://github.com/OpenNeuroDatasets/ds004507.git
```
#Explain session
#Explain why don't take HeadDown 
Linked to [issue#5](https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/issues/5)

> With Fsleyes manually segment the following file: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With FSLeyes, manually segment the following file: 
```

<details>
<summary>12 first images to label</summary>
```
sub-002_ses-headNormal_T2w_root-manual.nii.gz	
sub-002_ses-headUp_T2w_root-manual.nii.gz	
sub-003_ses-headNormal_T2w_root-manual.nii.gz
sub-003_ses-headUp_T2w_root-manual.nii.gz
sub-004_ses-headNormal_T2w_root-manual.nii.gz	
sub-004_ses-headUp_T2w_root-manual.nii.gz
sub-005_ses-headNormal_T2w_root-manual.nii.gz
sub-005_ses-headUp_T2w_root-manual.nii.gz
sub-006_ses-headNormal_T2w_root-manual.nii.gz
sub-006_ses-headUp_T2w_root-manual.nii.gz
sub-007_ses-headNormal_T2w_root-manual.nii.gz
sub-007_ses-headUp_T2w_root-manual.nii.gz
```
</details>

> You can use the `json_write.py` script to add the json file according to the .nii.gz file created

> Now convert this Bids dataset to a nnUNet dataset `link to command script`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now convert this BIDS dataset to a nnUNet dataset `link to command script`. 
```

This is the D1a dataset (100% train image no test image)

Add the 
<details>
<summary>dataset.json</summary>
```
{
    "channel_names": {
        "0": "T2w"
    },
    "labels": {
        "background": 0,
        "label": 1
    },
    "numTraining": 12,
    "file_ending": ".nii.gz",
    "overwrite_image_reader_writer": "SimpleITKIO"
}
```
</details>

Train model D1a with : `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=XXX nnUNetv2_train DATASETID 3d_fullres 0`

> You can stop when the progress.png reach a plateau (approx 250)

#Add create a dataset with all D0a in imagesTs

Predict all the segmentation of D0a dataset with the model M1a with `nnUNetv2_predict -i PATH_TO:imagesTs -o PATH_TO:Out_directory -d DATASETID -c 3d_fullres --save_probabilities -chk checkpoint_best.pth`

> Manually review the predicted label. In my case I have dropped `sub-006-Normal` `sub-009-Normal` I was not satisfy with the quality. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Manually review the predicted labels. 
Note: subjects `sub-006-Normal` and `sub-009-Normal` have been dropped since they did not satisfy the quality. 
```

images). After a manual review, two images were excluded because of unsatisfactory quality (sub-006_ses-headNormal and
sub-009_ses-headNormal)

> Refer to [issue#5](https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/issues/5).

#### D1b)

The resulting dataset, D1b consists of 18 MRIs from 10 subjects, 2 sessions (3 female, 7 male). The mean age is 22.9
years old, with a standard deviation of 1.21. Isotropic resolution of 0.6mm^3 (only one has a resolution of 0.7mm^3).

On this new dataset a five-fold training of nnUNetV2 3d_fullres model (M1b) has been conducted for 250 epochs, dice
scores were between 0.52 and 0.6. An attempt was made to enhance results using the post-processing
command (`nnUNetv2_apply_postprocessing`) of nnUNetV2, but no possible improvement was found so post-processing is useless in this case. Inference with
M1b has been conducted on the full D0b (spine-generic) dataset.

> Refer to [issue#7](https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/issues/7)

#### D2)

A manual review of the D0b prediction has led to a substantial number of images dropped. To facilitate the manual

> labelin SCT was used to denoise images (`sct_image --denoise`). Some centers have image specificity that made the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
labeling SCT was used to denoise images (`sct_image --denoise`). Some centers have image specificity that made the
```

level-specific spinal nerve segmentation.

A five-fold training of nnUNet 3d_fullres model has been conducted for 1000 epochs, dice scores were
between 0.4 and 0.6. No post-processing techniques led to an increase in scores under these
conditions. Upon reviewing the progress.png graph, a subsequent training was conducted with 2000 epochs. This decision
was based on the observation that the plateau had not been reached within the first 1000 epochs. The second training
yielded a dice score also ranging between 0.4 and 0.6. However, it exhibited more folds with scores
exceeding 0.5 compared to the first training conducted with 1000 epochs.

> Refer to [issue#8 part 3)](https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/issues/8).

</details>

### C) Reproduce

In the next section, all the instructions to reproduce the label files used in the final dataset will be described.

nnUNet is used to train model but the dataset format is not BIDS:

- From BIDS to
  nnUNet [convert_bids_to_nnUnetv2.py](https://github.com/ivadomed/utilities/blob/main/dataset_conversion/convert_bids_to_nnUnetv2.py)
- From nnUNet to BIDS [???](????)

> - Extract all image from bids to nnUNet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Extract all images from bids to nnUNet
```

  inference [extract_bids_subject.py](https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/blob/main/dataset_creation/extract_bids_subject.py)

> - Merge nnUNet
>   dataset [concat_nnUnet_dataset.py](https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/blob/main/dataset_creation/concat_nnUnet_dataset.py)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Merge several nnUNet datasets [concat_nnUnet_dataset.py](https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/blob/main/dataset_creation/concat_nnUnet_dataset.py)
```

> #How to explain FLSEYES labeling ?

Reviewer: Good question! We should record a short video explaining the procedure next week. See other SCT videos [here](https://www.youtube.com/@sctspinalcordtoolbox4189/videos).

> # Spinal-Rootlets Segmentation on T2w Images

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Spinal Nerve Rootlets Segmentation on T2w Images
```

## 1) Project Overview

> The goal of this project is to develop a deep learning (DL)-based method to segment and locate the spinal rootlets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of this project is to develop a deep learning (DL)-based method to segment and locate the spinal nerve rootlets.
```

A script to convert nerve segmentation to spinal level is also available. 

[Google slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1ZHliup_Mtk0OcmI1qkwmOIY7Ml4mO6vewIwFQjMMMPo/edit?usp=sharing) to
summarize this project are also available.

## 2) Work Done

### A) Literature and Data Review

No articles were found on this topic.

After reviewing the available
datasets ([issue#1](https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/issues/1#issue-1706345176)), it was determined

> that none of them were suitable.

Reviewer: What do you mean by "it was determined that none of them were suitable."? Do you mean that no GT masks were available?

Author: yes, it's more explained in the issue. The dataset has ground truth, but the image correspondence (label vs subject) is not good, or it's not the whole nerve segmented (only the DREZ or only one voxel at the middle point of the spinal level)

Reviewer: Okay! Got it! So then, we can rephrase the sentence; see the suggestion below. 
Also, I guess we can close the https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/issues/1# as completed. Potentially, https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/issues/1# could be renamed to something like "Summary of available GT masks" before closing.

> After reviewing the available
> datasets ([issue#1](https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/issues/1#issue-1706345176)), it was determined
> that none of them were suitable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After reviewing the available datasets ([issue#1](https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/issues/1#issue-1706345176)), it was determined that no dataset had available suitable ground truth labels.
```

### B) Dataset Creation

Initially, the plan was to test with a binary label (0: no rootlet, 1: rootlet). In the following text, the datasets
will be numbered as D1, D2, etc., and the models as M1, M2, etc.

**Active learning pathway:**

> ![pipeline](pipeline-graph.png)

Reviewer: Having "Subjects with uncertain labeling are drop" in a separate box is a little bit confusing.
The "Subjects with uncertain labeling are drop" sentence could be appended to "Manual correction":

"Manual correction (subjects with uncertain labeling were excluded)"

**Datasets summary**:

> | name | number images                          | MEAN (y.o) | STD  | labels         | label origin               | nnUNetV2 <br/>Dice score | link                                                                                            |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| name | number images                          | (mean age (y.o) | (std age  | labels         | label origin               | nnUNetV2 <br/>Dice score | link                                                                                            |
```

<summary>Details</summary>

#### D1a)

Dataset D1a was constructed with 12 subjects manually labeled (binary) from D0a. 12 MRIs from 6 subjects (3 female, 3
male), each subject participated in 2 sessions, one with normal neck flexion and another with neck extension. The mean
age is 22.5 y.o with a standard deviation of 0.52. Isotropic resolution of 0.6mm^3 (only one has a
resolution of 0.7mm^3).

One nnUNetV2 fold 3d_fullres model (M1a) was trained on D1a for 50 epochs, achieving a plateau with a dice
score of approximately 0.51. M1a was used to predict 20 subjects from D0a (all head-normal and head-up
images). After a manual review, two images were excluded because of unsatisfactory quality (sub-006_ses-headNormal and
sub-009_ses-headNormal)

> Refer to [issue#5](https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/issues/5).

#### D1b)

The resulting dataset, D1b consists of 18 MRIs from 10 subjects, 2 sessions (3 female, 7 male). The mean age is 22.9
years old, with a standard deviation of 1.21. Isotropic resolution of 0.6mm^3 (only one has a resolution of 0.7mm^3).

On this new dataset a five-fold training of nnUNetV2 3d_fullres model (M1b) has been conducted for 250 epochs, dice

> scores were between 0.52 and 0.6. An attempt was made to enhance results using the post-processing
> command of nnUNetV2, but no possible improvement was found so post-processing is useless in this case. Inference with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
scores were between 0.52 and 0.6. An attempt was made to enhance results using the post-processing
command (`nnUNetv2_apply_postprocessing`) of nnUNetV2, but no possible improvement was found so post-processing is useless in this case. Inference with
```

M1b has been conducted on the full D0b (spine-generic) dataset.

> Refer to [issue#7](https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/issues/7)

> #### D2)

Reviewer: In https://github.com/ivadomed/model-spinal-rootlets/issues/7#issuecomment-1593539494 you mentioned:
> The images have been reoriented with sct_maths in LPI orientation.

If reorientation was applied to any image, it should also be mentioned here in this README.

Also, does the model M3 requires images in a specific orientation (e.g., `LPI`)? 
Or do you do reorientation by yourself before running inference (this is something we are doing in another project; see [here](https://github.com/ivadomed/model_seg_sci/blob/3757fad091f11f1556fe76037e6053826dd6a120/packaging/run_inference.py#L75) and [here](https://github.com/ivadomed/model_seg_sci/blob/main/packaging/run_inference.py#L182-L183))?

Author: I have modified the orientation when necessary but just notice that I have run Cadotte prediction on RPI orientation instead of LPI. I am going to test if the results are better with LPI orient.

Author: Result are exactly the same for prediction on RPI or LPI images

A manual review of the D0b prediction has led to a substantial number of images dropped. To facilitate the manual

> labelin SCT was used to denoise images (`sct_image --denoise` ). Some centers have image specificity that made the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
labelin SCT was used to denoise images (`sct_image --denoise`). Some centers have image specificity that made the
```
